Welcome back.
We've talked about these five sorting algorithms and by now you should know that merge, sort and quicksort,
although they're harder to implement, are the most often used algorithms in real life because they
use divide and conquer to get us this o of n log n performance boost.
But can we beat o of n log n.
And here's the thing.
Mathematically, it is impossible to improve on this if anybody comes up with an algorithm that is faster
than this.
They're going to well, they're going to be very, very rich.
Mathematically, it's impossible because of an log n means that we have to sort by comparison, all
of these sorting algorithms have to compare every number to each other.
But there is one exception to this rule.
You can improve this if you don't make comparisons.
Huh?
What does that mean?
There's a small section of inputs that we can actually beat.
Oh, of an log n.
And these are called non comparison sorts.
And you'll most likely see counting sort and radical sort.
But what does that mean?
Counting sort and radical sort is an entire different way to think about sorting.
With comparison short, we decided the order of the numbers based on asking the question, Hey, is
this element bigger than the one over there?
What about the one over there and over there?
And we just kept doing that.
Every number got compared to each other.
Non comparison sorting does it a little bit differently.
We're going to use the way that numbers and data is stored on our computers in zeros and ones and take
advantage of that fact to sort things.
Now this can get pretty complex and as you can see here in this paper.
Just looking at the diagrams and for example, radical sort here in how we store numbers in zeros and
ones, we can use this knowledge to actually sort some things.
I'm going to leave resources for you if you want to get really technical and into this topic.
I do warn you, you can get a little bit mathy, but the one thing to note here is that these type of
sorting algorithm counting sort and radical sort only work with numbers, specifically integers in a
restricted range.
So if you have only numbers that you want to solve sort and the range of those numbers go from, let's
say, 0 to 100, that is a small range.
Then you would use something like this to make things really fast, but it wouldn't work on any type
of data.
It only really works on numbers because of the way numbers are stored in memory.
You see, unlike something like merge sort or quicksort that are universal, that is they can sort any
type of data.
Things like counting sort and radical sort is only useful for fixed length integers.
But they are able to beat the speed of Owen.
Log in.
And as you can see here, bucket sort radical sword counting sort in their average cases have o of n
plus k ov and k ov and k.
What wn and K means is beyond the scope of this course.
And some argue that in the end, this actually still turns out to be pretty slow.
I'll leave resources for you, like I said, so you can read up on them.
But the only thing you need to know about these is that sometimes if you have numbers that are within
a certain range, it could be faster than quicksort or master.
So now that we know this, let's do some interview exercises based on sorting to solidify what we just
learned.